Not leaving enough time to get to important meetings: so the fear of being late distracts from greater fear of the appointment. Most of our visions of happiness blithely assume beating all the statistical odds. Family life descends into game of 'how badly can everyone behave and still be tolerated?' Definition of family: infinitely badly. How long it takes to resist projections of others, to think 'That problem is coming from you rather than being in me'. There's a species of super competent politeness that is really indistinguishable from rudeness. 'We have saved his life' really means 'We have delayed his death'. Semantics: how everything changes when 'housework' is recategorised as 'exercise'. It's great when you finally realise that being miserable doesn't protect you from bad stuff happening. Most romantic thing: to be told something true but difficult about oneself with a teasing, sympathetic generous smile. End-game as a parent: that my children see me as an amiable, funny old goat, on their side and easy to overcome. One kind of good book should leave you asking: how did the author know that about me? The task of literature: to put a finger on emotions that are deeply our own, but that we couldn't have described on our own. So many of our problems would be alleviated if we had 3 or 4 exceptional friends living within a 2 minute radius. Use happy moods to draw the road map of the future you can rely on when you're next too weak/sad to dream ahead. It's a symptom of both happy and unhappy moods that that they make you forget your acquaintance with their opposites. After 40, men occasionally come to the very odd realisation that they might sometimes, though not often, be in the wrong. One of the most unambiguous victories of feminism is that today's fathers almost all do a better job than their fathers did. Because we don't understand much of ourselves, books we hardly understand can seem close to the truth: Joyce, Lacan, The modern romantic desire: for one special person who will spare us a need for anyone else. Too many eggs in one... Parenting: to be as tough as the world so kids will be ready for it - or to be completely gentle - for the very same reason... She was so competitive about seeming good & kind, she would have fought to the death to prove she was nicer than you. Writerly ego: one has to care quite a lot about reviews to go to the trouble of not reading them. Difference between hope & despair is different ways of telling stories from the same facts. Psychology of tears: we tend to cry in films not when things are sad, but when they suddenly turn out unusually well. There are people we'd long ago have forgotten about if they hadn't started to ignore us. Point isn't to achieve everything, just to pay respects to one or two of the things one suspects oneself capable of. Because we anyway live as if we were immortal, if science one day overcame death, we'd take it for granted at once. Not over-complicating: 'weird' behaviour in others can generally best be explained with the simple big impulses: envy, guilt, desire.. Getting to the top has an unfortunate tendency to persuade people that the system is OK after all. Writers don't vary in intelligence from book to book, they just stumble on forms that bring out the best of themselves - or don't... Most of what makes a book 'good' is that we are reading it at the right moment for us. Tragi-comic list inside every couple: Very Small Things we have Very Big Arguments about. Talk on Religion for Atheists at National Theatre, London, Mon 13 Feb: http://t.co/0Q4tOUgc Reputation a bit like a table: one or two marks and everyone notices: a whole host of scratches and it all blends in. The most environmentally friendly step is, of course, to cease existing. Perhaps there's no necessary connection between the two: feeling you're basically leading the right life - and being happy often. If only we could make something out of all those private fears we never share: wasting our talents, seeming like losers... Marriage therapists say: You can be right or you can be together - but you might not be able to be both. Fear of overly well-behaved children. The time to be out of control is clearly at 4, so that at 40... Hypochondria is just an imaginative response to the improbable nature of being alive. Much to the surprise of their (sentimental) elders, children generally can't wait to stop being children. You can say almost anything about anyone (s/he's so crazy, sweet, envious, shy, cowardly...). It always fits in some respect. The child smothers the passion from which it emerged; that made its existence possible. The boldness of middle age: a frantic desire not to have too many regrets. We'll never avoid sadness because we inevitably get our doses of hope wrong. It might be wisest sometimes to treat a set of concerns simply as a 'mood' - and wait for another, better set to come along soon. With age, you realise certain things just can't be fixed - and start to take frivolity more seriously. A strong desire not to be alone: a sure sign one is incubating something to tell oneself. That one's still trying to impress one's wife: romantic or a sad reflection of innate insecurity...? Half the bitchiness of the online world comes down to the sheer implausibility that it might be real humans at the end of the cable. At every stage of parenting, the worries of the previous stage feel madly exaggerated. To become a writer means learning to forgive yourself the horrors of the first draft. And the second, third and... Weakness is most charming in the strong. Where you envy most, that's the clue what to try to do next. To charm - a way of neutralising the powerful through their vanity. To read the paper: like raising a seashell to one's ear and catching the roar of humanity. Forgiveness depends on a sense that nastiness must be an expression of suffering rather than malice. The greater danger? To trust the mad insights & visions of the night or the settled atmosphere & habits of the working morning? When people ask you no questions about yourself, the issue tends to be envy, not disinterest. She was so private, there were things she even forgot to say to herself... Power is sex for the old. Like any confirmation of your choices, it can initially be flattering to learn someone else is trying to sleep with your spouse. Great conversations like beautiful squares one finds at night in foreign cities & doesn't know how to get back to in daytime. We start to feel grateful when we realise how little we actually deserve. Still lots of these signed bookplates available: alain@alaindebotton.com - along with Amazon (or other) receipt. http://t.co/jHArnXkz The most romantic, but difficult, thing you can do for someone you love is to listen to their concerns closely for an hour. Life would have to be so long for us not to keep making daft mistakes: by the 450th birthday, we'd just be getting the hang of it. Unfortunately, people do have to be slightly interested in us to notice that we're trying to ignore them. The thought that if one leaves them it will ruin their life can grow so overwhelming that one ends up staying and thus ruins their life. Profit is the reward for correctly understanding an aspect of reality ahead of your peers. Laziness in relationships arises because our earliest experience of love was with people who disguised the work that went into it. Failure is potential without any more time. The only people we can still believe are normal are those we don't know very well. World divided between those who have to go home before they are treated nicely - and those who have to go to work. One way to keep feeling young: to keep discovering new layers of immaturity. Running a country is so difficult, it is generally only rather limited people who feel they are up to the task. The effect of tiredness is the same now as it ever was in childhood: less energy to slay monsters. There are people so unusual looking, you feel clever for finding them attractive Couples' arguments: collisions over contrasting assessments of what constitutes the End of the World. So hard to accept that the prison door is open and we could walk out if we truly wanted. To show ourselves ‘as we truly are’: a prospect we should spare anyone we claim truly to love. Back-to-front modern assumption: we think it's easy to love, just hard to find the 'right one'. Decadence: a forgetting of how privilege is gained - that precipitates its loss. When one is finally feeling lucid, clear-eyed and rational, people always ask if one's drunk. The good tends always to outweigh the bad: it just takes longer to get itself organised. Insomnia: the mind's revenge for all the thoughts we've avoided having in the day. Working life only made possible by the 2 great narcotics: coffee (to go up) and wine (to come down). We label children's interest in celebrity 'growing up too fast'. But isn't it simply proof of their immaturity? When ill, you want people to be as concerned as if you were dying: yet as robustly reassuring as if you were immortal. The starting point should be that religions are works of culture like any other. Religion for atheists: the delicate but necessary balance with that baby and that bathwater. Positives in religion - also available elsewhere: community, ethical framework, ritual, oratory, awe, perspective... Best examples of 'secular' chapels: Rothko Chapel, Texas, Bruder Chapel, Peter Zumthor, Germany. A fascinating tradition. The boldness of the middle aged in seduction isn't courage: it's just the fear of death. The end logic of our relationship to computers: asking google, 'what shall I do with my life?' The best cure for one's bad tendencies is to see them in action in another person. Ideal approach to the Humanities: if the questions raised by Oprah Winfrey would be answered by the faculty at Harvard. Getting older is a version of looking tired that any amount of sleep doesn't overcome. It shouldn't be disrespectful to the complexity of the human condition to say that despair is also, often, just low blood sugar. Relationship of authors to publishers like parents to schools: by definition, they can never quite care enough. Parenting: on a good day one credits nurture, on a bad day, one despairingly blames nature. Most business meetings involve one party elaborately suppressing a wish to shout at the other: just give me the money. To succeed as a TV station, you need an audience of 1m+, as a paper, 250k+, as a writer, 50k+ and as an artist, a mere 10+. The news: delicate balance between usefully informing us of world - and hypnotically keeping us at bay from ourselves. Can be sure an important idea is incubating when being alone/undistracted grows unbearable. British life's characteristic conservatism: usually someone in the room on hand to say 'steady on'. It can take so so long to realise that - in the deep sense - one is no longer at school. The challenge for the next generation: to be more interesting to talk to than a phone is to browse. However friendly they are, people who generate a feeling you have to impress them to earn their love Are Not Friends. Appreciation of nature immensely enhanced by suffering. It takes one or two tragedies till one notices clouds, sunsets, daisies. Good work tends to happen only at the end of day: when the fear of accomplishing nothing finally exceeds fear of doing it badly. 'The true index of a man's character is the health of his wife', Cyril Connolly. What is established but daft gets called common sense. What might be clever though very new is dismissed as 'loony'. Unexpected admirer. @rupertmurdoch: Just read Religion for Atheists. Great writing, thoughtful, disturbing.. Highly recommend. Never check a phone without having the time to deal with the bad news it might contain. My new book is ready to despatch: http://t.co/rbKwKuLS What an achievement if one can build one's self-esteem chiefly from the opinions of people one actually likes. Schadenfreude is a tough word for drawing comfort from not being alone in suffering. Resisting bitterness means refusing to be identified with your failures. The noble art of 'moving on'. We wouldn't attempt to land a 747 without training yet assume the no-less-difficult task of marriage can happen 'intuitively'. Cynics are only idealists with awkwardly high standards. We excuse ourselves by saying we haven't got time to read - but how much better read we are than Shakespeare or Dante... Love your children reliably and they'll gracefully outgrow you. Ignore them and they'll be obsessed with you for life. The more envious a society, the more skilled its successful members will be at (protective) self-deprecation: England. Many of our pains could be summed up as: problems of the unrecognised ego in an indifferent world. Big questions of small children poignant: makes us realise how much we get by without understanding. The traditional stiff upper lip of the British hasn't gone away; it just morphed into irony. Half the fear of failure is of the judgement of false friends we feel compelled to impress but don't even like. The desire to be know to, let alone liked by, complete strangers should be treated as an illness like any other. Most of life about correctly determining who we should give up on. Much modern architecture fails that general human challenge: how to look good when you're no longer so young. Sometimes the only way to act is not to think all the consequences through. Even after X factor, there are those who worry one might 'vulgarise' Kant or Hegel. 'Who are you to tell me how to live?' remains one of the great modern complaints. As if we were doing such a good job of it unaided... Most lives have a similar amount of pain in them - it's just distributed differently. Forgiveness requires a good memory: an active sense of how many times we ourselves stood in need of charity from others. Most of what makes a book 'good' is that we are reading it at the right moment for us. We dislike most people too much to do them the honour of arguing with them. Nothing more natural than that kids should care about celebrity. It's not 'growing up too fast', it's proof of immaturity. Few events have the power to alter priorities as swiftly and decisively as orgasm. We don't need a god to weigh our souls and judge us harshly for our shortcomings. Our kids will do that for us. Kids don't mind ugly houses so long as they're Love-filled ones. As adults, when love is less believable, we need Beauty too. Bitterness is anger that forgot where it came from. He was reluctant to call it a midlife crisis in case it detracted from the melodrama of all the other crises he'd had since he was 10. Style of parenting: better mixed monarchy now rather than dictatorship followed by revolution. At a certain point, a sense of humour shifts from being a pleasant social gambit to being the centerpiece of a survival strategy. Increased productivity promises a society of leisure, but we can't get beyond the pejorative word 'unemployed'. Saying one doesn't want a present: just a way of complaining that non-material things one really wants are being ignored again. Making problems can be more relaxing than accepting good fortune - at least one feels in control. Happiness is really just the 15 minutes after you've completed one challenge - and before you've identified a new one. An incomprehensible book on an interesting topic still provides a valuable opportunity to work out what one thinks oneself. Children and family deeply enriching, but when a young couple announces a first child, I can't help but feel a little sorry for them. Humans are masters of self-justification, even murderers find a rationale: don't hold out for the atonement of others. A moment when the deepest wish is no longer to be well thought of by one's parents, but by one's children in 20 years. At the end of a relationship, it's the one who is not in love who makes the tender speeches. The only possible way to begin a book is to tell oneself that its eventual failure is guaranteed - but survivable. The more people you have to ask for permission, the more dangerous a project gets. Newspapers reflect the truth of nations as those cloud icons in forecasts do the awesome complexity of the sky. Basic moment of realisation as a parent: despite my ostensible role as the caregiver, I need them far more than they need me. At what age do remarks go from charming romantic longing to tragic lechery? A kindly female friend tells me: after 28. There could be nothing more peculiar than a politician who announced a wish to make the world more Beautiful. From Catholicism: when trying to get people to believe your ideas, don't forget to use best architects, composers, painters... Citizens, no less than guests at a party, need 'hosts' to show them how to come together. A theory satisfying according to the number of disparate phenomena to which it can lend order. Kids stay optimistic by imagining that the adults around them messed up for unrepresentative avoidable reasons. However sad death is, it would take a hardy adult to accept an offer magically to return to 7 and start over. When will a country decide 'and our contribution to humanity will be beautiful cities...' Most newspaper stories follow the tragic unfurling of problems to which humanity has all the answers already. For no necessary reason, unimaginable that any new city of 21st c will be as attractive as Paris, Edinburgh, SF... Use mornings of courage, light and optimism to draw the roadmap that will work in the darkness. One remains optimistic about humanity by gracefully thinking that one's own experiences are not representative. If the fear of the bully is that his victim is invulnerable and smug, best to burst into tears early and loudly. There isn't any such thing as good writing: really it's just a covert term for good thinking. Communism isn't politics or economics: it's an overwhelming longing for security. You wait for something even more unpleasant to come along to get around to doing the thing you were avoiding. By the force of their immaturity, children drag their parents into being adults. The gap between what we're meant to feel and actually feel - the fertile land of literature. 'Where the needs of the world and your talents cross, there lies your vocation' (attributed to) Aristotle. For an architect to worry about a budget, like a fox feeling sorry about its prey. This constant fear: is it insanity or just ambition? Our disrespect for thinking: someone sitting in a chair, gazing out of the window blankly, always described as 'doing nothing'. More aware of just how much can go wrong, every day that goes by without a crisis feels like a blessing. Modern manager's dilemma: the tension between needing to be loved and needing to get one's own way. 'Creative destruction' such a nice theory till it happens to you. Writing about how awful it is makes it just ever so slightly less so. With time, you can even learn to bear the thought 'I have ruined my life' with a certain lightness. Modern life - musical chairs: frantic because we know the system doesn't have the right number of seats. However complex their consequences, most of our neuroses can be summed up in single sentences: happiness made him feel out of control. Changing a flight at very short notice: a feeling one's either just escaped or headed straight to death. Being embarrassed by one's parents - stems from a delusion that one chose them. The best salve for failure - to have quite a lot else going on. A sense of deep entitlement in someone young, beautiful and clever is almost charming to behold. We get revenge on the young by calling them naïve. Looking older is a version of looking tired that can't be cured by sleep. Tendency always to underestimate the intensity of people's relationship to their hair and their weight. Kids reveal how nice we'd all be if we didn't have a sexual agenda. Hard not to end up hating anyone with massive power over you - however benign it is. One should never fully trust in the apparent stupidity or intelligence of anyone. The problem with the net: it prevents us from boredom and all its many advantages. The moment you become someone others are afraid to communicate bad news to, you are lost. However complex their consequences, most of our neuroses can be summed up in single sentences: happiness made him feel out of control. Changing a flight at very short notice: a feeling one's either just escaped or headed straight to death. Being embarrassed by one's parents - stems from a delusion that one chose them. The best salve for failure - to have quite a lot else going on. A sense of deep entitlement in someone young, beautiful and clever is almost charming to behold. We get revenge on the young by calling them naïve. Looking older is a version of looking tired that can't be cured by sleep. Tendency always to underestimate the intensity of people's relationship to their hair and their weight. Kids reveal how nice we'd all be if we didn't have a sexual agenda. Hard not to end up hating anyone with massive power over you - however benign it is. One should never fully trust in the apparent stupidity or intelligence of anyone. The problem with the net: it prevents us from boredom and all its many advantages. The moment you become someone others are afraid to communicate bad news to, you are lost. Only relationships you can't run away from teach you love as spiritual discipline. At the end of summer, we should make ritual promises to the sun - of which the lemon would be the talisman over eight dark months. One way to keep feeling young is to keep discovering new layers of immaturity. As the lamb is to christianity, so the fig is to my (imaginary) religion. To read the paper: like raising a seashell to one's ear and catching the roar of humanity. In 21st C.: to create multinationals focused on the needs of the soul, as in the 20th C. we built them around those of the body. During overlong work meetings, looking at a man across the table, wondering: 'And you too must once have been just a boy.' After inequalities of income/opportunity are overcome, we'll still have intelligence, health, beauty and age. We tend to keep going down the wrong track to spare ourselves the humiliation and fear of acknowledging all that wasted time. The closer one comes to the tops of organisations, the more one sees the overall goals are fundamentally up in the air. With age, on waking up, the sense of:'me,still? again?' One thing to feel one's generation is doomed by suprahuman catastrophes: another by sheer daftness. My mind refuses to think properly except when I'm supposed to be already asleep - or not yet awake. We all have a handful of alternative, monstrous-looking selves who greet us in unfortunate photographs and hallway mirrors. The most practical and necessary proposals are always dismissed as 'very idealistic'. The good tends always to outweigh the bad: it just takes longer to get itself organised. We should cite our age not by how many years we've lived, but by how many we statistically have left: a 70 yr old UK male as 8 etc. Vital for a writer to sense that his audience notices - why else bother with the really hard bits? So hard to accept that the prison door is open and we could walk out if we truly wanted. We can only long for people who are not going to be too easily impressed by us. Our children are like our runaway ids which we guiltily try to contain. Life is a hospice where we need consolation rather than a hospital where we can expect a cure. He was the last most good looking, able and clever person on earth to have chosen to devote his career to...poetry. Modern society believes in Love and in Work - but, imbued with Romanticism, rarely believes in Working at Love. The world is hardly short of good ideas - the challenge is how to make them take hold and stick. Decadence: an amnesia as to how privilege is gained that precipitates its loss. To show ourselves 'as we truly are' - a terrifying treat we should spare most of humanity, especially anyone we claim to love. To charm is to neutralise the powerful through their vanity. Back-to-front modern assumption: we think it's easy to love, just hard to find the 'right one'. Where you hate and envy most, that is where the clues are to what you should do next. People only get really interesting when they start to rattle the bars of their cages. When one is finally feeling lucid, clear-eyed and rational, people always ask if one's drunk. We're best placed to choose wisely in love when we have no particularly strong need for anyone. Weakness is only charming in the strong. Those who go on to be proper writers are those who can forgive themselves the horrors of the first draft. Paranoia: the freewheeling echo of all the bad stuff one has done, coming back for revenge. How tough you are on the cravings of kids reflects what the world has done to your own hopes. Great conversations are like beautiful squares in foreign cities one finds at night and then don't know how to get back to in daytime. Work only starts when the fear of doing nothing finally exceeds the fear of doing something badly. At every new stage of parenting, the worries of the previous stage appear madly exaggerated. The greater danger? To trust the mad insights & visions of the night or the settled atmosphere & habits of Monday morning? Failure is potential without any more time. Important to remember: when an English person says 'You must come around some time,' it means leave me alone forever Forgiveness depends on a sense that nastiness is an expression of suffering, not maliciousness. Never check a Blackberry if you don't also have time to deal with the bad news it might contain. Long before they're political beliefs, right and left wing are emotional dispositions. Things always seem more solid when we didn't make them - and don't know anyone involved. Adult love shouldn't be about remembering what it was like to be loved as a child, but imagining what it took for a parent to love us. Laziness in relationships endemic because our earliest experience of love was with people who disguised the work that went into it. Both happiness and misery render us incapable of properly remembering what it was like to experience their converse. An unfortunate marriage: still the most effective self-induced way to come face to face with tragedy. What if love, while theoretically open to all, in fact turned out to be an elitist guild, a rare secular version of 'election'? We get confused because the word love covers both awe and admiration for (apparent) perfection and tenderness towards need and frailty. There are still people who think that to cheer someone up you need to say something cheerful. The people we fancy have to be kept secret, but not half as secret as those we envy. It remains challenging to say to a friend: you need to comfort me for the distress that your success has caused me. Perhaps the most unambiguous victory of feminism has been to ensure that fathers properly nurture their children. There are days one's amazed and grateful one doesn't look even older... The most attractive people are the desperate but stoic-comedic. The world's airport departure lounges filled with people overwhelmed by love for their families: the world's kitchens a little less so. One can take it as an axiom that one's weirdest, most 'unnatural' thoughts are by definition shared by millions. One shouldn't blame people for being insincerely polite: one should be pleased they are at least they are bothering to lie. On a foreign hair on the pillow: a lack of imagination a true asset when overnighting in most hotels. Insomnia is a glamorous term for 'thoughts you forgot to have in the day.' The inner pages of the Financial Times: an organisation of 14,000 people, all their joys and sorrows, ends up as + 2.3. Like any confirmation of your choices, it can initially be flattering to learn that someone else is trying to sleep with your spouse. Half the bitchiness of the online world due to the sheer implausibility that it might be real humans at the other end of the cable. People are always asking writers what they're working on now - to deflect from never having read anything they've done hitherto. Aesthetic risk: to digest complexity to the point that half the audience declare it stupidity. Those who love art most often complain that it doesn't do enough: but it is in the end only ever a suggestion, not an order. In 24 hrs, the true self peaks out only in the 10mins before and after sleep. The confidence of middle age: a desperate desire not to have too many regrets. Atheists shouldnt denigrate religions, they should steal from them. It is really only in the age of the Blackberry that people can get a vivid sense of why monasteries were invented. The child smothers the passion from which it emerged; that made its existence possible. You can say almost anything about anyone (s/he's so sweet, envious, shy, cowardly...). It always fits in some respect. Much to the surprise of most adults, children generally can't wait to stop being children. It's not that most friends drop us when they reach fame and fortune. We have to drop them to avoid the hellfires of envy. Meeting famous people a little like reaching the Taj Mahal: wonder that something so often represented actually exists. We (40+) were perhaps the last generation to fear our fathers. Success is a reduction in the number of people capable of torturing you with envy. The boundless terror of the B lister trapped by a C lister at an A list party. Getting to the top has a miraculous ability to persuade people that the system is OK. A true sense of your age derives not from people you fancy, but from those who start to fancy you. Hypochondria is just a form of wonder at how improbable it is to be alive. Not publishing a book for a few years can lull an author into the mistaken belief that he has no serious enemies. It's hard to write a single sentence that won't upset someone. A silence with a beautiful person always leaves you feeling you're the boring one. Beware of overly well-behaved children: the time to be truly crazy and unreasonable is when you are four. So that at 40... Bad art might be defined as a series of unfortunate choices about what to show/explain and what to leave out. After one or two of life's serious setbacks, it becomes hard to remain entirely dry-eyed when 'I will survive' comes on the radio. In our hearts we are totally lonely with precisely the same fears: wasting our talents and appearing like losers. Monogamy is a fine ideal but when someone says of their partner 'I trust them a 1000%', it's hard not to feel a little depressed. The moment inspiration fails, the entire scaffolding holding up an author's life starts to vibrate very alarmingly. Like shyness, signs of aging can be erotic - and for the same reason: as tokens of vulnerability. To be as tough as the world to give kids the strength to deal with it eventually, or to be far less tough - for the very same reason. Is that things are OK proof that it was ridiculous to worry - or are things OK only because one worried? There are books that plant a flag on interesting territory without being able to hold it. So many relationships spoilt by our tendency to become mean when we are in fact hurt. An astonishing number of conflicts and catastrophes can be traced back to the brute fact that one of the parties hasn't slept enough. The scale of the success you need is determined by the intensity of your self-hatred. The desire to impress one's own wife: a sign of love or of chronic inadequacy/inauthenticity? To say of parenting, 'one can anyway never get it right' is to sidestep that one can still do the impossible better or worse. To get a readership of 50,000, you probably need to be known to a million and actively disliked (but not read) by 20,000. Writers don't vary in intelligence from book to book - they just hit on better and worse forms to draw them out. The form is all. Putting your name into 'Twitter Search' has all the wisdom of reading someone else's diary. Biology very clever in making sure we dont despair too much about bad news more than 12 months ahead. The drugs we really need wouldn't make us high, rather reliably connect us with who we already are at our best. It's only a few novelists who are more interesting making up stories than telling us about their private lives and activities. A chief effect of the internet is to boost the already unhelpfully strong sense that the answers are 'out there' rather than within. When trying to decode weird behaviour of others, think of the simple explanations and basic emotions: fear, envy, guilt... So different are their life experiences, beautiful women and ugly men might as well be classed as different species. Favourite books contain fragments of the book one hasn't yet managed to write oneself. Aspiration in parenting: to try to be more like a grand-parent (perspective, humour) Always wondrous when, after 12 hours awake, one shuts one eyes and feels back in contact with the dream that ended that morning. Over 50 guests, you can be sure most people will be bitching about the hosts. Few of us have so many loyal friends. It's almost touching when, at 9pm, the manager of an almost entirely empty restaurant asks sternly at the door, 'Have you booked?' In architecture, as in writing, but not dentistry, most practitioners are at any time feeling badly about how things are going. Books can affect a lot of people a little, architecture a few people a lot. The time codes on emails & tweets gives a good measure of the scale of insomnia, and the unexpected people afflicted. You gain true measure of someone's character by the way they turn you down. Most projects take so long to work out, life becomes like a song in which someone constantly presses pause. Travel agents would be wiser to ask us what we hope to change about our lives rather than simply where we wish to go. On hearing of someone who has never felt any need or desire to go online, one feels pity certainly, but also a curious kind of envy. When does a job feel meaningful? Whenever it allows us to generate delight or reduce suffering in others. A measure of how seldom we are able to say what we feel to people is how many writers there are in the world. What gets called 'laziness' is usually a pull towards another conflicting kind of work rather than a desire to do nothing. There are people so unusual looking, you feel intelligent for finding them attractive. There's relief in seeing that people 10 years younger than you are also - slowly - getting older. Patience and a lack of burning ambition are vital advantages in climbing to the top of large bureaucracies. Despite love, therapy, literature, achievement, few sensations are more difficult to shake off than the sense one is a loser. The problem with people who would be outstanding in a shipwreck is that there aren't - in the end - so many shipwrecks. Whatever their value to science, the galaxies are in the end as valuable to mankind as solutions to megalomania and anxiety. You can measure out your years by observing the rising age of the oldest person you could conceive of sleeping with. Married people are always happy to see others getting married: 2 less souls to envy for the ambiguous joys of guiltless sexual exploration Publishers are like gliders, powerless save for when there is a prevailing wind, when one wants them to have engines. Our sense of what is beautiful is a reflection of what we lack, and as our lacks change, so will our tastes. Shelter aside, good architecture is about embedding values we revere into matter - so we can be reminded of what counts. The only way I can get the confidence to dare to write another book is to tell myself it will be the last prior to a new career. Only by declaring a book completely finished can one start to see how much remains to be done on it. She was so private, there were things she even forgot to say to herself... If we found a way of being immortal, it would soon seem like the most natural and unremarkable state. The boldness of middle-aged seducers isn't new confidence - just an increased fear of death. Developing an adequate response to rejection, neither defensive nor sentimental, lies at the heart of any serious attempt at sanity. Profit is the reward for correctly understanding an aspect of reality ahead of your peers. One keeps writing to atone for the sins of the last book. It seems the only way to write a half decent book is to worry oneself sick on an hourly basis that one is producing a complete disaster. The point isn't to achieve everything, simply to honour what one suspects one is capable of. The symptoms of hatching a good idea: despair, insomnia, irritability, mania... The need to edit, so familiar in art, suggests how bad we are at being the best of ourselves in one go, myopia at any 1 moment. There are people we wouldn't dream of thinking about all the time if they hadn't begun to ignore us. It seems a sign of immaturity to mind so much being sometimes treated rather like a child. The difference between hope and despair boils down to an ability to spin different stories from the same facts. Feelings & thoughts we have ommitted to have find their revenge in twitches and failures to fall asleep when we should. The only childhood truly deserving of the title 'privileged' is one which imbues someone with a capacity to be a friend to themselves. The effect of tiredness is the same now as it ever was in childhood: less energy to slay monsters. The thought that if one leaves them it will ruin their life can grow so overwhelming that one ends up staying and thus ruins their life. Addressing yourself and the reader as 'we' in a book is like inviting strangers to your home and hoping they'll say yes. The fantasy of the sulking party: that one will be fully understood without needing to explain anything. We can only hope that, contrary to surface amnesia, all we've read is still within us somewhere. A symptom of greatness in literature is the impression (often entirely illusory) that the author might simply be very nice. The moment we cry in a film is not when things are sad but when they turn out to be more beautiful than we expected them to be. The pleasure of the aphorism is to evaporate away the situation that gave rise to it - feelings without a biography. Is it possible to be a writer without caring a little too much what other people think? We cannot admit that unemployment is a natural consequence of the ideal that economists revere as 'higher productivity' The writerly ego: one has to care rather a lot about one's reviews to go to the trouble of not reading them. We can be sure there is something crucial to address when the idea of being alone has grown truly unbearable. A devilish relationship exists between the significance of an idea and how nervous the prospect of entertaining it makes us What is most offensive about militant atheists is their seeming lack of sympathy for desperation. They seem so... un-needy. With age, you realise certain things just can't be fixed - and start to take frivolity more seriously. A goal of parenting: that your children make at least one less big mistake than you did. The Romantic individualism of the modern world where to be 'just like other people' is typically understood as an insult. We feel guilty for all that we have not yet read, but overlook how much better read we already are than Augustine or Dante. Accusing a younger generation of being more selfish than the last is to forget the problem is youth not generation, a problem cured by time. Goal of education is to save time: to teach in a few years what it took humanity 300 years of sporadic stumbling to discover. Running a country is so difficult, it is generally only rather limited people who feel they are up to the task. Always surprising how many people equate a decline of civilisation with the decline in the correct use of semi colons. We want two incompatible things of our universities: that they teach us how to make a living - and teach us how to live. The impatience of the reader is the major and fascinating artistic challenge of the age. As calm is impossible, the trick seems to be to identify the most fruitful ways to worry. Aphorisms: provocative, exaggerated sentences that overstate their case as a way of flushing out occasional truths. With age, life like a party where a sniper is hidden in trees outside, picking people off. Odd guests die, the rest party on Difference between Greek tragedy + tabloid journalism: the former wants us to think: whatever terrible thing they did, you could do too A quick way to judge character: imagine how much you'd like to be a given person's child The most obvious, but never mentioned, prediction about the future is that it will share most of its characteristics with the past. We should be suspicious of relationships with anyone who could not confess to at least 5 reasons why they would be very testing to live with A measure for judging the worth of a book: how many other books on the topic does it render unnecessary. People who are deeply competitive about seeming 'good' and 'kind' & will fight to the end to prove they are nicer than you. Pessimists have the greatest capacity for appreciation: they never expect things to go right so are justly awed by sunsets, olives, baths. It's always hard to resist the conclusion that those who aren't interested in us are egomaniacs. All the complaints your partner's exes once levelled, so implausible on the first date, you will end up understanding. Our impulse to be social is enhanced by having an option to avoid others. It is easiest confidently to seduce those we are least attracted to. If the food is the most memorable aspect of a dinner party, something has evidently gone wrong. Ashamed and bemused by our own fragility, we consistently underestimate how anxious everyone else is. It takes a resilient spirit to keep faith with humanity after a walk down Oxford Street. Modern romanticism: we go in search of one person who will spare us any need for other people. We'd probably work a lot less hard if we could be sure of being liked without any worldly achievements to our names. What should schools produce: obedient drones or creative originals? Tragedy is capitalism needs 70% of former, 30% of latter. World divided between those who have to go home before they are treated nicely - and those who have to go to work. We work to receive the respect of people we don't especially like. We work to stop thinking about sex and worrying about death. The only people we can still believe are normal are those we don't know very well. Social climbers often unfairly castigated for cynicism, yet such is their love of power, they genuinely fall in love with their new friends However basic the dualism, almost no relationship is without one party that can be characterised as 'still' and the other as 'fizzy'. Power is sex for the old. We want our politicians to be at once entirely ordinary and completely exceptional. Politicians speak of 'changing the country', yet how hard just to reform a single person in one area. The media mercilessly bullies those unfortunate enough to have been caught fulfilling fantasies we share. If life was a useful length, by 150 we'd be getting the hang of relationships, c. 200 we'd work out what we really wanted to do. It took me so long to realise why so many writers are alcoholics: because they are scared. There are meetings which, when cancelled at the last minute, give one an ecstatic feeling of having cheated death for a little longer. Political zealots so obsessed with purity, they'd rather see an enemy win than one of their own who dared to make a compromise. How frighteningly naive those cynics of today must once have been to grow so disappointed by their politicians. The wisdom behind certain rites of passage in stopping the past from clinging to us like goosegrass burrs. That everyone is as immature, hysterical & in need of love as we are is, despite all the evidence, one of life's continuous surprises. The most time-consuming arguments are always those sparked by the impatient retort that life is too short to discuss this sort of thing. Peculiar how writers imbue publishers with an aura of parental/pedagogic authority - when they are in fact simply folks in business. We should spare a thought for Io, Jupiter's moon, and its c.400 volcanoes active at any one point. People who do us wrong should at least have the modesty not, on top of it all, to seek to make us like them. A decline in a narcissistic desire for self-promotion can easily lead you to be mistaken for boring. It becomes easy to pay someone compliments when you no longer desire them. How many writers get tripped up by the unhelpful assumption that the natural genre is the novel rather than the essay or aphorism Most great problems have no solutions, beyond the relief to be had in sharing and analysing them. Feeling one has had enough luck, more than one deserves, is perhaps the most unfamiliar and uncharted of all emotions When it finally briefly happens, happiness can feel very worrying. What extraordinary charity certain women show in admitting to desires for a category which, with infinite grace, they term 'nerds'. The law of money & complexity: an artist needs 20 followers to survive, a writer 20,000, a newspaper 300,000; a tv station, a million. Schopenhauer: the task of philosophy is to turn tears into knowledge. And for me, a sigh into a tweet. You have to have quite a lot of friends and even more acquaintances before it becomes acceptable to say you are lonely. It can be hard to remember the depth of happiness that reigned unappreciated just before the onset of The Computer Problem. Since starting to write 15 yrs ago, few weeks have passed without several hours being lost to the persecutory sounds of a pneumatic drill. The reason to travel: there are inner transitions we can't properly cement without a change of locations. Wisdom of religions in their insistence that we schedule moments for gratitude, self-examination, forgiveness. Whim won't do it. As a writer, no reason why one will be properly working though at the desk at eight or indeed not working though still in bed at midday. To ask of a thought: where did its constituent parts reside before one 'had' it? So many of adult life's ills can be explained by not having four friends with whom we can gossip and weep living within a two minute radius. It takes a particular lack of imagination to feel no discomfort in the presence of a cleaner. We focus on solving individual worries, forgetting we are just perennially anxious people, who endlessly replace one concern with another The call from the tabloid newspaper as much a herald of trouble as the ring at the door from the secret service in Communist eras. What grief we'd avoid if we knew how to transfer emotional experience across generations, as we do money or scientific knowledge. To detach the self from the ego and achieve calm, the East proposes Meditation, the West, sunbathing. Exaggeration of nature: to ensure we make, at most, 4 children we must obsess about sex hourly from 12 to 80. It's remarkably easy to think of oneself as a nice person so long as one lives on one's own. Gender differences: yet to be born: the man who slept with a woman principally because she had written a book he liked. On the origins of compassion for others: what monsters we would be if our bodies were incapable of pain or decay. Our moods are so unstable because we are only chemicals in a saline solution - not entries in a ledger or words in a book. While eyeing up attractive people in the street is obviously a bad thing, I find myself worrying what's been lost in outgrowing the habit. A doctor writes to ask whether he should give medicine up for writing. I have to restrain myself from screaming the answer. Writers know to beware of euphoria: the question now is just how much worse the chapter will seem in the morning. Writing a book has about it some of the anxiety of telling a joke and having to wait several years to know whether or not it was funny. No more pejorative genre than the self-help book yet what in the end were the Bible, Marcus Aurelius's Meditations, Pascal's Pensees... It becomes worryingly hard to hate anyone once we have studied their eyelids trembling to the twists and turns of an unknown dream. Compared to babies, with age, we lose the ability to make others feel sorry for us, even as we acquire more things to be pitied for. Dawn: the capacity to think truly seems (unmystically) connected to the number of other people who are awake in the city at the same time. Office romance: a job is only worth risking for the sake of a love that would be more important than the job itself. The only reliably shocking stance now is to be traditional. I like my philosophers a little crazy – I don’t want them to escape human folly, I want them to describe and interpret it well. 'Recession' or 'security' are now the excuses of choice in all awkward work situations; grown-up equivalents of 'the dog ate the homework'. Individualism: a failed person in Medieval England was known as an 'unfortunate.' An unsuccessful person now is termed a 'loser'. To one's enemies: 'And you think you are telling me something new! You're an amateur beside my advanced degree.' Utter sentimentality to imagine that our enemies ever regret their misdeeds: we are all geniuses at letting ourselves off the hook. To start writing means trying to quieten the thousand internal voices that argue why one is obviously not the right person for the job. One can't fail to despair at the merest suggestion to 'cheer up'. Invitations to wallow and indulge are the only humane cures. Self-hatred: one does everything to incite others to hate us - but longs more than anything for them to comfort us. Schopenhauer: 'The task of art is to turn tears into knowledge'. Stendhal, in the middle of his melancholic ON LOVE: 'My fear is that all I might have written is a sigh'. It's the main symptom, and the horror of despair that we don't even have the strength to be nice to those who might help us. We bite. Other worlds: what a quiet afternoon it must have been across Mars's Libya Montes valley. One can't fail to be excited by any command to 'calm down'. Our personalities emerge in the areas where we express what the world casually terms 'fussiness'. I feel an instant bond with people who find it hard to fall and stay asleep. It suggests things get to them, as they do to me. The hope on picking up a book: that it will tell us what we know but haven't had time to think. If we let the true impact of events resonate, we'd need hours to process minutes. Anxiety grows from thoughts we haven't given ourselves time to have. The best vaccine against anger is to witness others in its throes. Unreflective people say, 'But where are the intellectuals today?' - as if the problem were one of supply rather than (their) demand. The only mood in which to start writing is self-disgust. Writing becomes an act of atonement for procrastination - and 'self-waste'. The great fear of us moderns: being naive. And Schiller's acute appraisal of Goethe: a man who remembered how to be naive. Even if we learn from our mistakes, life is continually too new and uncharted for us (me) to avoid outright idiocy on a regular basis. Unlike modern gallery work, Christian art never elicited the query: ‘what is this for?’ The point was evident: the education of the soul. The dream of the modern individualist: to be famous. The dream of the pre-modern collectivist: to help sustain an institution. Society continuously introduces us to new works of art and in the process prevents any one of them from assuming due weight in our minds Respect for children who burst into tears when a fork is not exactly in the right place. What perfectionism we have to abandon with age. A certain kind of intelligence may be nothing more or less than a superior capacity for dissatisfaction. The office is to us what the cloister was to medieval christianity: a nominally chaste arena with an unrivalled capacity to excite desire. Office life would not be possible without the hard take-offs and landings effected by coffee and alcohol. There should be a special circle in hell reserved for 'friends' who from a love of 'honesty' report the mean words of others back to us. Despite the best efforts of critics and the hopes of authors, our tastes in books are probably as inherent & unbudgeable as those in food. Melodrama is always the order of the day. Our minds, charged with steering us through life, are structurally, necessarily insanely ego-istic. The vanity of people who are offended by the obvious truths: as if what we are should, by now, still be very unusual. Most of 'wisdom' boils down to the art of not letting things get to you. Few architectural works would benefit most cities more than contemporary versions of the Wailing Wall - the name alone is a relief. Epiphanies of pessimists: the capacity to celebrate modest moments is relative to the sense that we cannot make life as a whole perfect. The book will be killed not directly by new technology but by the monkey mind it breeds. The issue is concentration, not royalties. Authors write things down so as to have to think of them less. 5 years after first child, despite the joy, still cannot witness a couple expecting without feeling sorry for, and worrying about them. I feel an entirely unfair and defensive fear of doctors for being the ones who will one day provide the details of the death sentence. When we are too tired to write, that is when the interesting thoughts dare to sneak out. Writing opens up the otherwise unusual prospect of being violently disliked by strangers & training oneself not to mind. Writers have to go on working despite the increasing likelihood that they have already written their most important book. Embarking on another book, writers seldom dare note that few of their favourite authors ever wrote more than 2 or 3 works they really loved Definition of a present: something you can't get for yourself. As a child, that meant toys. In adulthood: reassurance, sympathy, forgiveness Strange complaint that death is now taboo. Why not? It is horrifying, sad, impossible - not something we should even try to be wise about. Years of enviable success, hard work, politeness, all form the firewood which is briefly and brilliantly set alight by the sex scandal. We cannot help but exaggerate our parents: their goodness, evil, significance... To try to discover what our gifts are - then to align them with something the world might need - and pay for. A lifetime's struggle. The vital quality modern architects are least-trained to include or respect, from a deadly dread of kitsch: cosiness. Aiming to make the world more beautiful sounds like an insurmountably peculiar and fey ambition. Always amazing how much work we get done in our sleep. In its downgrading of the visual, the modern world is resolutely and in an entirely secular sense Protestant rather than Catholic. To complain that the world is ugly is not a form distress that contemporary politics is geared either to respect or respond to. To be flattered or insulted? 'I enjoy your tweets much more than your books...' If we are good, it is usually more from lack of opportunity for transgression than from intrinsic virtue. So aware of birds in the early morning - and give them no more thought for the rest of the day. The things people apologise to us about are almost never those that have upset us. We have become such experts at being always in touch, informed, connected. Now must relearn how to be silent, disconnected, alone. The problem with those who love us: they usually hold us in too high esteem. They leave us lonely through their respect Rare the morning when I dont greet the new day with... anxiety. Lamentable creature. In relationships: the only way to trust is not to ask too many questions. If love is about a desire to reassure and discover mutual anxieties, it is promising to come across well-bitten nails. The attraction of the melancholic: sadness has created the room we're going to take up in their lives. You know an attraction has started when it becomes embarrassing to look at someone's wrists and, of course, fingers. Our world, with its infinite drama & beauty, never seems as boring as when viewed through the prism of CNN. Religion the answer to needs that predated religion. To ask the secular world: where have the needs gone now? Sad about all the inventions we're going to die too soon to see. The last person to die of cancer, to have to take a plane... Falling asleep in a hotel bed requires a momentous repression of the imagination as to the complexities of bacterial life English life: still a fascinating shy meeting of souls when people ask 'Have you ever been in therapy?' and find they both have. Abstractly cheering thought: the millions of people around the world who will tonight sleep together for the first time. Relic of a religious mindset: the belief, after suffering, that we are now 'due some good news'. The best way to start a conversation at dinner: “So what was everyone frightened of today?” It is now only the very religious who take sex seriously. There is no faster way to destroy one's academic reputation than to appear on television. The double betrayal of a modern liberal arts education: it neither teaches you how to live nor how to work. The art of English social life: to manage to make one's complaints sound like jokes and one's anger like self-deprecation. What we want from artists - to be helped to notice what we have already seen. Children's utter disinterest in staying children. They can't wait to be like us, despite our half-hearted warnings. Sleeping well: a highly skilled performance, equivalent to a gymnastic high-dive - a pity we are required to do it seven nights a week. Troubling, irresistible gadgets of tomorrow: a device that informs you of when and where you have starred in the sexual fantasies of others. Impossible thought: that those we envy are themselves envious. Ideal hotel: psychoanalyst on premises, tomb-like silence (no clicks or whirrs), structured introductions to other guests, consoling books We are so open to new gadgets, so closed to new social forms, so few attempts to reinvent the family, friendship, marriage. All designed objects are propaganda for a certain way of life. We get angry with talented writers who refuse to write the books we have in our own unconscious. It takes particular self-confidence not to mind being adored. The modern seducer to his victim: 'What I most admire about you is your mixture of strength and vulnerability'. A new religion, centered on the fig, the lemon and the papaya. My favourite: 'a man should swallow a toad every morning to be sure of not meeting with anything more disgusting in the day ahead' chamfort C's favourite quotation: 'the true index of a man's character is the health of his wife', Cyril Connolly Heroes: La Rochefoucauld, Chamfort, La Bruyere, Pascal, Stendhal, Cioran We're drawn to works of art infused with qualities we don't have in ourselves. History of art: story of what different peoples had missing. On architecture: even if we lived in Venice or a Louis Kahn house, we would still often be in a bad mood. Their defenders have to accept that the finest works of art can usually do less for us than a siesta - or an aspirin. Instructive when we cry in films: not when things are sad, but when they are suddenly hopeful, at moments of reconciliation and repentance. Sensitivity to beauty, natural and man-made, seems linked to pain. The carefree and in love rarely garden The desire to sleep with someone inappropriately much reduced by a discussion airing the possibility. Most of us still in jobs unthinkingly chosen for us by our sixteen year old selves. We can only envy people towards whom we feel equal: it would not occur to anyone to envy the queen for her house. She is too odd to envy. The non-religious message of the sabbath: a warning against megalomania. A reminder we did not create and so do not control the world. I only ever wrote about other writers to get them to say things I was too shy to say myself. To those frustrated that art cannot do more: art is a suggestion, not an order, whispers rather than commands. I am the frustrated one. Definition of good parenting: that the child grow up with no wish to become a writer. Beloved books: a fragment of me in the words of another. We spend so much more time thinking about our enemies. Porn: its attackers criticise it for being so fake. Greater alarm that so much of it now looks so real. The aphorist's enemy: those who feel they must point out that they do not belong to the 'we...' Life without ritual: burden of having to mark all significance oneself. Essence of good writing: here is what I feel, better than I could have said it. A meeting with a man called Albert dePetrillo - a relief, always, to find someone with a name as odd as mine. We sense the kinship. Good work only happens in the last 10 minutes of the day, when the fear of not accomplishing anything at last exceeds the fear of writing. 'And what did you do today daddy?' Three paragraphs. And to think this might count as an honest living. Writerly self-disgust: How rare to finish a day and think: I have worked hard and dutifully to the best of my ability. 1 day out of 20? Despite the monstrous inconvenience,  it's hard to resist a child-like wish that it snow more and more. We will reach the end of our lives and still not have understood more than a fraction of how we function and what is under our bonnet Stories of macho writers taking to drink has a tendency to cloud why they did so: because they were scared witless... of writing. Trying to make a living from writing: some of the excitement of trying to power a city exclusively from a set of wind turbines. Receiving a bad review is like being told you are selfish: it's always true enough to prove unforgettable. People that keep permanently excited about writing: Roland Barthes, Sophie Calle, Virginia Woolf (the essays), Norman Mailer Greatest enemy of writing - The Fear. No danger of running out of things to say, only of courage to say them joyfully, recklessly. Goals for 2010: Concentration, humour, friendship, ambition, courage, good cheer.
An end to: paranoia, timidity, self-pity, evil, resentment More worrying than age/failure is how easily we get used to them: we feel grateful we have one kidney left and might make it to evening Writers are sucking in (unconsciously) the modern obsession with productivity - and forgetting about effectiveness. The impatience of the reader is the major and fascinating artistic challenge of the age. As calm is impossible, the trick seems to be to identify the most fruitful ways to worry. Aphorisms: provocative, exaggerated sentences that overstate their case as a way of flushing out occasional truths. With age, life like a party where a sniper is hidden in trees outside, picking people off. Odd guests die, the rest party on Difference between Greek tragedy + tabloid journalism: the former wants us to think: whatever terrible thing they did, you could do too A quick way to judge character: imagine how much you'd like to be a given person's child The most obvious, but never mentioned, prediction about the future is that it will share most of its characteristics with the past. We should be suspicious of relationships with anyone who could not confess to at least 5 reasons why they would be very testing to live with A measure for judging the worth of a book: how many other books on the topic does it render unnecessary. At the core of the ethics of most religions: a command that one try to imagine what it might be like to be somebody else. Quick way to distinguish just from unjust wars: force all rulers to send their own children to conflicts they unleash. In every work of genius we recognize our own rejected thoughts - Emerson In praise of Original Sin - Being told one is inherently evil is a perfect backdrop against which to take modest steps towards virtue. The modern state - always keener on building prisons than preventing the need for them. 'The ultimate test of a man's character is the health of his wife', Cyril Connolly Writing: a field where the consequences of mediocrity are considerably more serious than in banking or the law. In a democracy, judgements about values tremble before the question: ‘And who are you to tell me how to live?’ The fear of moralism has made us suspicious of all morality. Love your children and they will be able to outgrow you. Ignore your children and they will be obsessed with you for life. Wisdom - that part of knowledge that isn't only true, but also happens to be helpful. Productive moments of the day: have any great things ever been achieved between 3 and 4pm? Thoughts are like shy animals - you have to look away (have a bath, go to a cafe) if they're to run out. Bookshops are a valuable destination for the lonely given all the books that were written because authors couldn't find anyone to talk to. Journeys are the midwives of thought. We excuse our intellects by declaring ourselves under-read and yet forget how much better read we all already are than Plato or Dante. Cynics are only idealists with awkwardly high standards. How much more interesting to observe how an airline meal is prepared than to eat it...